---
toc: true
layout: post
description: Main post about the Neural Networks course project.
categories: [markdown]
title: Predicting penalty outcome in football.
---
# Predicting penalty outcome in football based on early signs, before the ball reaches the goal line.

## Main idea

Test Test


In football, there are lots of predictions made at all times.
Starting from friends amongst fans arguing and ending with big worldwide betting companies.
Most often it is considered if a match is won by one or another team, but also some statistical results are considered.

In this project a smaller event, namely penalty kick is considered.
Despite of being a short event itself it causes lot of exitement and waiting for the result.
All kinds of signs are noted during the penalty kick, starting from the facts of who is the goalkeeper and who is actually taking the penalty shot.
The next signs are, which foot the kicker uses and which directions the ball moves to.
At that moment the audience can also see which side the goalkeeper decides to jump.
And these signs are the key concept used in this project that aims to predict whether the ball ends up in the net or not based on the information above.

## The dataset

For training the network, a dataset from Kaggle is used, that contains all of the fields listed above for every penalty taken during English Premier League in 2016/17 season.
The dataset also contains several fields that are not important for the binary prediction that is made in this project. For example the end result of the match does not give any input to the penalty at the time it was taken. Also it should not be that important what team was playing, but the player and goalkeeper themselves.

We chose that suggested dataset, because, although being not too big, it already contains the necessary data.
It was also noted, that this kind of dataset is easily constructable for whatever match, because penalties are often higlighted in short highlights video and therefore the necessary information can be rather quickly collected and added to the network.

Looking at options available, following data fields were chosen to be used in the first iteration of this project:

* Match Week 
    * It may affect the result. At the beginning of the season there is lot less pressure and concentration level and physique of the player might not be at its best yet.
* Player(Kicker)
    * Before the penalty kick we also know the history of the player. For this reason stats are collected from tranfermarket.com and added to the dataset. Also it would be beneficial to add where the player most usually hits, but this information is still not available.
* Time of penalty awarded
    * Fatigue affects the result
* Kick Direction
    * Left/right/center – In which way was the ball going?
* Goal keeper direction
    * Which way did the goalkeeper jump. Here it would be beneficial to also find out, if the goalkeeper jumped to the right direction.
* Match
    * From this we can find out who was the goalkeeper and add the data from the past results.
    

### Analysing the data

The dataset was analyzed also in the Kaggle page where it was taken from. It was shown there, that there are lots of correlations among the dataset, which suggests that neural networks should be capable of learning even bigger relations with enough data, between the parameters and the outcome of the penalty.
    
    
## Difficulties

Though there are some difficulties, when feeding this kind of data to a neural network, as it has to be considered, that the goalkeeper and player are not well representable in numerical value, that would be straight usable in numeric analysis. So, it has to be considered when designing a network, that the network should be capable of categorizing the actors in those kicks somehow, so that the information is possible to combine with other parameters and therefore combined with other inputs. 

For this reason the kicker and goalkeeper should be presented with relevant statistical data. This data could be looked up separately from databases or even calculated priorly using the information from the same dataset that is used for this network (the average jumping direction or percent of saved penalties).

## Testing

### Tests with small dataset and without player information

The first tests were made with simplest network, only taking the ball direction and goalkeeper direction as input and using simple fully connected neural network to predict the result.
After that different components were added to the network one-by-one to see how they effect the result.

### Tests with full dataset using different network structure

When it was seen how all parameters effect the outcome of the simple network, there were several structural changes made to the network, including changing the learning rate, layer count and sizes and also adding different layer types and activation function were tested.

As the end result it was possible to see, that...


### Testing with different data

As the original network was trained on English Premiere League data, it was interesting to see, if we could gather some data from different leagues and if the network would produce similar results for those test cases.

For this we collected same kind of information for 20 penalty kicks from different matches using online databases and added data that was missing from videos. (The actual process was the other way around as the video was looked for first, because it is harder to find videos than necessary player data from databases).


### Conclusions

Here we plan to draw conclusions when all of the tests are executed and data is analyzed.

